# What it's Like
## Lisa Patterson
In 1967, a study based in North Carolina confirmed that about 800,000 illegal abortions were performed [nationally each year](https://www.guttmacher.org/journals/psrh/2003/01/public-health-impact-legal-abortion-30-years-later). A number of women also turned to self inducing abortion methods. As a result, hospitals throughout the country often treated women suffering from complications from such procedures. [Cook County Hospital in Chicago, Illinois reserved ward 41 for women who “suffered complications of illegal abortions.”](https://contraceptionmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40834-021-00149-6) Women injured their bodies by ingesting turpentine (a toxic liquid resembling resin), quinine (a chemical that can cause problems of the blood), pennyroyal essential oil (an ingredient used in herbal dog flea collars),and other types of “self inducing abortion” substances. Women would get to the hospital bleeding and hemorrhaging from instances where something was “placed inside their uterus through the cervix.” Sticks dipped in oil, knitting needles, coat hangers, ball point pens, turkey basters were tools used and damage often caused infection, sepsis, embolisms, and sometimes death.

Roe vs. Wade allowed the invention of new, safer abortion procedures; however, not all women have access to such treatment. In 1973, Texas was one of the more conservative, restrictive states in regard to abortion and this reputation continues in present day. Since before 1973, women in Texas with more wealthy financial backgrounds, namely with at least $1500 to spend on an abortion, could choose to travel out of state for easier access to abortion. However, what options are left for women who do not have the means to travel, let alone cannot afford an expensive medical procedure?

Fast forward to 2014, and women in Texas still struggle with the choice of obtaining an abortion because the State government limits accessto clinics, especially in west Texas. The Lower Rio Grande Valley (LRGV) resides in 10 of the lowest income counties in Texas. [Interviews of women ages 15-49 tell of present daystruggles and challenges of becomingpregnant and then wanting an abortion](https://bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12905-019-0877-0). Many times women living in LRGV turn to self abortion methods not too different from those like Cook County Hospital described. Herbs, vitamins, prescription medicine from Mexico, alcohol,drugs, and other ingestible substances leave women in pain, and sometimes with bleeding andhemorrhaging for prolonged periods of time. Women from LRGV may obtain these “medicines” from relatives who go to Mexico, or travel to Mexico themselves for a more invasive procedure.Imagine how much more painful this experience could be for a woman that did not even consent to sexual acts that resulted in her pregnancy, or a woman without adequate sexual education.

The side effects to unregulated abortions not overseen by a doctor can last many years. 6.9% of the women interviewed from LRGV tried to abort their pregnancy alone first, because they knew it was too difficult financially to go to a legal facility, then after complications they were forced to seek professional medical help. Women who try self inducing abortions often experience intense cramping, bleeding, and sometimes permanently damage reproductive organs. [In 2012 and 2014, 7% of Texas abortion patients attempted abortions alone first, then went to a hospital after complications, compared tothe National statistic of 3% of abortion patients](https://bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12905-019-0877-0). This comparison is notable when taking into account House Bills passed by the Texas Legislature in 2013. A number of legal abortion facilities closer to West Texas closeddown as a result of the legislation. [In 2016, National legislation overturned HB2, yet newabortion clinics are slow to replace the ones that closed down](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4985084/).

Women from lower income areas do not have equal access to abortion, nor much assistance in family planning. Sometimes pregnant women in need turn to Crisis Pregnancy Centers (CPC)for advice or help, [but these are unregulated centers that do not offer medical prenatal care](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4985084/). Often these centers reinforce religious stigma against abortion and do not provide assistance to new mothers after birth either. However, women see advertisements for free diapers, counseling, or pregnancy tests, and visit CPCs because they need direction and help.

A women’s decision to obtain an abortion or not often depends on whether they can afford to travel, their access to information of different options, and their own personal environments and belief systems. Shame towards women who do not plan to get pregnant but then do is traumatic and detrimental to healthy development of future generations. Throughout modern history, Texas government directly worked to make abortion access more difficult for women without also providing significant assistance to new mothers if they do decide to have ababy. This unproductive, unhelpful legislature needs to be replaced with organized efforts to prioritize women’s health, especially for women that cannot personally afford adequate prenatal care alone.